# Repository goals

Using [Packer](http://.packer.io) it generates:

1. [QEMU images](https://www.qemu.org/). The image is in raw format because I had specific needs, but qcow2 is much much smaller

2. [VirtualBox Images](https://www.virtualbox.org/)

After the image is generated it **also** generates:

* [Vagrant Box](http://vagrantup.com). The vagrant provider will be libvirt for Qemu images and virtualbox for virtualbox images

PS: Libvirt and Virtualbox provider does not work with Mac M1. Check below for more. Using UTM configured manually is the only workaround for now

# Packer How To

Install the tools from the links above

Flow example building all images on the same run:

```
packer init ubuntu
packer validate ubuntu
packer build ubuntu
```

**Build images only from qemu:**

```
packer build -only=qemu.ubuntu ubuntu
```

**Build images only from virtualbox:**
```
packer build -only=virtualbox-iso.ubuntu ubuntu
```

*Build Options:*
* -var-file=packer/vars/ubuntu-jammy-server.pkrvars.hcl -> Use a vars file if needed
* -on-error=[cleanup|abort|ask|run-cleanup-provisioner] If the build fails do: clean up (default), abort, ask, or run-cleanup-provisioner.
* -debug -> Press enter on every step

# How to use the image generated by packer

## On Virtualbox

You can use the generate images and import then into virtualbox

## On Mac - UTM

### Booting
Since I am new to UTM. To open with it you have to:
1. Add > Emulate > Other > Skip ISO Boot > Choose machine specs > Save
2. Open machine you just created > Edit > Qemu > Disable UEFI boot
3. Go to Disk > Delete existing > Add new one > Import > Select image and user Virtio as interface
4. Go to Network > Emulated VLAN with network card virtio-net-pci
5. Hit Save. Go back to Edit > Network > Now you will see Port Forwarding option. Edit the guest port to 22 and host port to anything

### Fixing internet
Run `ip link show` and look at the last adapter name. For example, it may be listed as `enp0s1`.
Edit `/etc/netplan/00-installer-config.yaml` and copy your configuration for `enp0s8` (or whatever the old adapter was named) and paste it immediately after for enp0s1 (or whatever the new adapter is named).
Reboot machine or use `netplan apply` and you should be able to use networking again

## Using Vagrant

Run `vagrant box add ubuntu-server ubuntu-server.box`

Run `vagrant init ubuntu-server`

Run `vagrant up`

This will generate a Vagrantfile based on the Vagranfile template from this repository.

# Box configuration details

## VM resources & Vagrantfile

The boxes resources will be configured by Vagrantfile templates for use but you can overwrite it using your own Vagrantfile.

### Running ansible from Vagrantfile
Add the below to your Vagrantfile

```
Vagrant.configure("2") do |config|
  config.vm.provision "ansible_local" do |ansible|
    ansible.playbook = "myansible/playbook.yml"
    ansible.verbose = true
  end
end
```

## Defining names and hostnames in Vagrant
```
Vagrant.configure("2") do |config|
  # Hostname
  config.vm.hostname = "myubuntuvm"
  # Replace default in vagrant
  config.vm.define "myubuntuvm"
  # Name in GUI
  config.vm.provider :virtualbox do |vb|
    vb.name = "myubuntuvm"
  end
end
```

## Define multiple machines in one file

Once you define multi machines in one vagrantfile you can target a machine using vagrant

```
vagrant up myubuntuvn
```

Here is a snipet

```
Vagrant.configure("2") do |config|

  config.vm.define "myubuntuvm" do |myubuntuvm|

    myubuntuvm.vm.box = "ubuntu-20.04-desktop-amd64"
    myubuntuvm.vm.hostname = "myubuntuvm"
    myubuntuvm.vm.provider :virtualbox do |virtualbox|
      virtualbox.name = "myubuntuvm"
    end
  end

  config.vm.define "mydevvm" do |mydevvm|

    mydevvm.vm.box = "ubuntu-19.10-desktop-amd64"
    mydevvm.vm.hostname = "mydevvm"
    mydevvm.vm.provider :virtualbox do |virtualbox|
      virtualbox.name = "mydevvm"
    end
  end
end
```

# Packer Implementation Details

## Cloud Init - Preparing Image for Packer
In a cloud environment you would have images specially prepare for cloud so your cloud users and identities can interact with it. Since on laptops I don't have this I need to create a user that packer can interact with and skip the default installation steps of Ubuntu iso.

The user-data template file which instructs the OS to configure the OS initial setup and user that packer will use. Instead of using ssh_username and ssh_password from packer I am generating a temporary SSH key which will be used as authentication and later removed from the image

Additionaly I am also adding a password which will be requested to change on first login and my own SSH key to make things easier

## Things I tried and troubleshooting

### Storage/Disk Issues

**Disk Sizes:** For each source disk sizes have different sintax.

### UEFI Boot Issues
Here are the issues I faced in order to make UEFI boot to work:

**Packer** You need to tell Packer to use EFI with QEMU, the OVMF files were download from a Ubuntu machine after doing an `apt-get install -y ovmf`


**CloudInit:** I use the default storage configurations from curtin by not declaring on user-data and that wouldn't allow me to use UEFI boot not even after tweaking the order with `reorder_uefi`. According to [here](https://askubuntu.com/questions/1487504/ubuntu-22-04-autoinstall-works-on-uefi-but-not-mbr-in-virtualbox) and many other [sources](https://askubuntu.com/questions/1438902/autoinstall-support-both-efi-and-legacy-boot) 2 boot methods (UEFI and legacy bios) are not supported as part of autoinstall (subiquity). The workaround seems to consists of tricking cloud init by using the `early-commands`.

**Packer Boot Issues:** Everything seems to be okey right? No, after installation is finished packer is stuck on first boot. Had to use to `late-commands`

More can be found in `efi-boot` branch.

### Specify vagrant file as packer templatfile

Created issue https://github.com/hashicorp/packer/issues/12700. I tried to bypass this using a post_processor shell but it didn't work because it couldn't handle the variables when creating the file.

### Overwrite vagrant provider with qemu

Using Qemu I was no able to specify `provider_override = virtualbox` due to error: Post-processor failed: ovf file couldn't be found so I removed this option.

### Using libvirt plugin with Vagrant on Mac M1

Couldn't make it work without instaling a lot of things due to [issue](https://gitlab.com/libvirt/libvirt/-/issues/75/). Error was:

Error Error while connecting to Libvirt: Error making a connection to libvirt URI qemu:///system:
Call to virConnectOpen failed: Failed to connect socket to '/usr/local/var/run/libvirt/virtqemud-sock': No such file or directory

Some other things I have tried to overcome this but didn't work:

```
brew install libvirt
arch -x86_64 brew install virt-manager
brew services start libvirt
vagrant plugin install vagrant-libvirt
virt-manager -c "qemu:///session" --no-fork
```

I also tried to convert the box with `vagrant mutate plugin` and to use the vagrant qemu provider by following instructions [here](https://github.com/ppggff/vagrant-qemu/wiki/Create-Libvirt-Box) which leads to a corrupted box